# MUMT-306 project report

## Objectives

My original objective was to write a polyrhythmic metronome. As I started working on libmetro, the objectives became more concrete:

1. Write a library for building basic metronomes i.e. set a bpm for a sine wave click track
    1. Use a real-time audio library and learn how to use ringbuffers and other techniques of high-performance real-time audio code
2. Support additional timbres by using Stk drum sounds
    1. This is important for playing simultaneous tracks (e.g. a 3/8 over a 2/4) to distinguish each track by timbre
3. Learn more complex time signatures, and implement them alongside the basic metronome e.g. polyrhythms, compound time, syncoptation
4. Ensure the resulting code looks more 'music' than 'C++'
    1. A counterpart to point 4 is that I drew inspiration from Max/MSP's synthesis objects (metro, cycle) to design the resulting C++ API.
5. Ensure the underlying C++ code of the library is both *correct* and *well-behaved* by testing and verifying the code using industry best practices to protect end-users from C++'s notorious footguns

### Expansion on point 5

Since my goal is to build a library for building metronomes (and not a metronome), it's possible that my demos/examples are musically incorrect, given that I'm studying time signatures for the first time. That's not a big deal. A musician could (and probably should) eyeball the following code:

```
auto poly1 = metro::Measure(2);
poly1[0] = metro::Note(metro::Note::Timbre::Drum, 185.0, 100.0)
    + metro::Note(metro::Note::Timbre::Drum, 207.65, 100.0);
poly1[1] = metro::Note(metro::Note::Timbre::Drum, 207.65, 50.0);

metronome.add_measure(metro::Measure::NoteLength::Quarter, poly1);

auto poly2 = metro::Measure(3);
poly2[0] = metro::Note(metro::Note::Timbre::Drum, 73.42, 100.0)
    + metro::Note(metro::Note::Timbre::Drum, 92.50, 100.0);
poly2[1] = metro::Note(metro::Note::Timbre::Drum, 73.42, 50.0);
poly2[2] = metro::Note(metro::Note::Timbre::Drum, 73.42, 50.0);

metronome.add_measure(
metro::Measure::NoteLength::QuarterTriplet, poly2);
```

This is what it sounds like:

\htmlonly
<audio controls="1">
  <source src="./static/poly_3_2_demo.wav"
          type="audio/wav">
  </source>
</audio>
\endhtmlonly

I think it's a 3:2 polyrhythm. Wikipedia (**CITATION NEEDED**) says it might be a cross-rhythm, or hemiola. The code describes that this is 3 dotted quarter notes played over 2 quarter notes. My musician friend says it sounds good, but he could just be flattering me. Either way, the corrections a musician would make to the above code should be in the musical features only.

What a musician _shouldn't_ need to do with libmetro is debug a segmentation fault, or undefined behavior, or a memory leak, or any other (**CITATION NEEDED**) sharp edges of C++. By providing a library, it's my responsibility to ensure it is well-behaved. If a rhythm expert is forced to debug C++ when using libmetro, that would be a failure of my ultimate objective.

## Methodology

### 1. The precise clock

The most critical aspect of a metronome is having an accurate timer. A naive ticker implementation is as follows:

```
int bpm = 100;

auto period_us = std::chrono::duration_cast<std::chrono::microseconds>(
	    std::chrono::duration<double, std::micro>(
	        1000000.0 * (60.0 / bpm)));

// 100bpm period is 600,000 microseconds i.e. tick every 0.6s

while (true) {
        // insert code to play a click
        std::this_thread::sleep_for(period_us);
    }
}
```

The documentation for [`std::this_thread::sleep_for`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/thread/sleep_for) says:

>>>Blocks the execution of the current thread for _at least_ the specified sleep_duration. This function may block for longer than sleep_duration due to scheduling or resource contention delays.

### 2. Making it more musical

### 3. Quality tools - UBSAN, etc.
